https://fosrlaw.com/2023/04/04/
Search
Search Lexology
Lexology
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Thailand Recognizes E-Signatures
Formichella & Sritawat Attorneys at Law
Formichella & Sritawat Attorneys at Law logo
Thailand April 4 2023
The eCommerce market in Southeast Asia is one of the fastest growing and most promising, with its projection to grow to $11 billion in 2025. According to the Electronic Transactions Development Agency, in 2017, the total eCommerce market in Thailand was estimated at $2 billion. The total Thai eCommerce revenue is expected to reach $3.5 billion in 2018. The driving factors arise from increased Internet and mobile phone use as well as improved logistics and e-payment systems. 

Source: www.export.gov

With the rapid growth of eCommerce transactions, closing transactions via the traditional exchange of signatures opens the door to various issues. For banks and payment service providers, there is always the problem of chargebacks. Of course, verification methods are increasing, but the starting point in closing a digital transaction is an e-signature.

Under Thai law, an “e-signature” is a letter, character, number, sound, or any other symbol created in electronic form which can be used in conjunction with electronic data for establishing the relationship between a person and such electronic data.”

The law clearly expresses that electronic data’s enforceable and binding effect cannot be denied or rejected because such data is produced electronically. An e-signature is automatically considered reliable/trustworthy if such e-signature:

It is created and linked exclusively to its owner.
It is made under the exclusive control of the signatory without other persons involved.
Any change to such e-signature must be detectable and identifiable.
Any amendment to an executed document using such e-signature can be detected and identified.  
An e-signature using Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) technology is currently recognised under Thai law as secure and reliable. Thus, technologies using PKI for e-signatures are legally binding and enforceable.

Formichella & Sritawat Attorneys at Law - Naytiwut Jamallsawat

The above is for general information purposes only and should not be relied upon as legal advice. For further inquiries, please contact John Formichella or Naytiwut Jamallsawat at info@fosrlaw.com

﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Filed under
Thailand IT & Data Protection Formichella & Sritawat Attorneys at Law
Topics
Electronic signature
Popular articles from this firm
Telecommunication Licensing in Thailand*
In brief: media law and regulation in Thailand*
Thailand: Nominee Shareholding - Opinions of the Thai Supreme Court*
Criminal Defamation Litigation in Thailand*
Computer Crime Act in Thailand - Supreme Court Application*
If you would like to learn how Lexology can drive your content marketing strategy forward, please email enquiries@lexology.com.

Related practical resourcesPRO
Checklist
Checklist: Lawful processing of personal data under the GDPR (UK)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Making an international transfer of personal data under the GDPR (EU)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Lawful processing of personal data under the GDPR (EU)
Recently updated
View all
Related research hubs
Thailand
IT & Data Protection
×
My Lexology
Access my saved content
 Full article, 29 minutes ago, Arias
Digitalization in Honduras: regulation on electronic signatures
Resources
Daily newsfeed
Panoramic
Research hubs
Learn
In-Depth
Lexy: AI search
Scanner
Lexology Index
Find an expert
Reports
Research methodology
Submissions
Instruct Counsel
Client Choice 2025
More
About us
Legal Influencers
Firms
Blog
Events
Popular
Code of ethics
Lexology Academic
Legal
Terms of use
Cookies
Disclaimer
Privacy policy
Contact
Contact
RSS feeds
Submissions
 
Search
Search Lexology
Follow on X
Follow on LinkedIn
© Copyright 2006 - 2025 Law Business Research

Law Business Research
