https://www.cozen.com/news-resources/publications/2023/ca-court-of-appeal-calls-into-question-evidentiary-value-of-e-signatures
Search
Search Lexology
Lexology
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
California Court of Appeal Calls Into Question Evidentiary Value of Electronic Signatures
Cozen O'Connor
Cozen O'Connor logo
USA January 24 2023
On January 19, 2023, the California Court of Appeal, First District, Division 4, issued a troubling decision regarding the evidentiary value of electronic signatures in Iyere v. Wise Auto Group.1

First, a caveat. The troubling part is dicta, not the core decision. The core decision is perfectly sound. That said, the dicta is troubling enough to warrant this alert.

The plaintiffs, a group of employees, filed certain claims against their former employer, Wise Auto Group (WAG). WAG moved to compel arbitration. In opposition, the plaintiffs each filed nearly identical declarations claiming that they did not recall signing the arbitration agreement. The trial court denied the motion; WAG appealed.

The Court of Appeal soundly reversed, holding that the plaintiffs’ inability to recall signing the arbitration agreement is largely irrelevant because they do not deny that their respective personal signatures appear on the document. Absent testimony that the physical signatures were forged or inauthentic, testimony that they did not recall signing is insufficient to create a factual dispute.

However, the Court of Appeal made it clear that this decision was based largely on the fact that the signatures were personal, physical signatures, not electronic ones. “While handwritten and electronic signatures have the same legal effect once authenticated, there is a considerable difference between the evidence needed to authenticate the two. Authenticating an electronic signature, if challenged, can be quite daunting.”2 The Court of Appeal reasoned that an individual cannot confirm or deny the authenticity of an electronic signature simply by looking at the document.3 Accordingly, “the individual’s inability to recall signing electronically may reasonably be regarded as evidence that the person did not do so.”4 By contrast, a person “is capable of recognizing his or her own personal signature” and if “the individual does not deny that the handwritten signature is his or her own, that person’s failure to remember signing is of little or no significance.”5

The Court of Appeal noted, but expressly disagreed with, a 2021 decision in a case styled Gamboa v. Northeast Community Clinic.6 The Gamboa court stated that the difference between physical and electronic signatures is a “distinction without a legal difference” because “electronic and handwritten signatures have the same legal effect and are equally enforceable.”7

This line of cases is one to keep a close eye on. Until this issue is fleshed out and more clearly resolved, consider mandating that all agreements (such as arbitration agreements, in which authenticity is frequently called into question) be signed with physical signatures.

To view all formatting for this article (eg, tables, footnotes), please access the original here.
Cozen O'Connor - Brett D. Watson
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Filed under
USA California Arbitration & ADR Litigation Cozen O'Connor
Topics
Electronic signature
Courts
California courts of appeal
Popular articles from this firm
Florida Secures Order Blocking Enforcement of Real Estate Agreements*
Democratic AGs Tout Role of DEI Initiatives in Preventing Workplace Discrimination*
Cozen Currents: America (First) at an Inflection Point*
Jackson v. Spinnaker: Court Rules a Thorough Investigation is Just Good Business, Not Bad Faith*
Unpacking Dark Patterns*
If you would like to learn how Lexology can drive your content marketing strategy forward, please email enquiries@lexology.com.

Related practical resourcesPRO
Checklist
Checklist: Addressing online defamation and protecting your digital reputation (UK)
How-to guide
How-to guide: The legal framework for resolving disputes in England and Wales (UK)
Checklist
Checklist: Considerations prior to issuing court proceedings (UK)
View all
Related research hubs
USA
Litigation
×
My Lexology
Access my saved content
 Full article, 30 minutes ago, Arias
Digitalization in Honduras: regulation on electronic signatures
Resources
Daily newsfeed
Panoramic
Research hubs
Learn
In-Depth
Lexy: AI search
Scanner
Lexology Index
Find an expert
Reports
Research methodology
Submissions
Instruct Counsel
Client Choice 2025
More
About us
Legal Influencers
Firms
Blog
Events
Popular
Code of ethics
Lexology Academic
Legal
Terms of use
Cookies
Disclaimer
Privacy policy
Contact
Contact
RSS feeds
Submissions
 
Search
Search Lexology
Follow on X
Follow on LinkedIn
© Copyright 2006 - 2025 Law Business Research

Law Business Research
