https://www.paulhastings.com/insights/client-alerts/japans-twilight-of-wet-signatures-and-chops-contract-practice-moves-towards
Search
Search Lexology
Lexology
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Japan’s Twilight of Wet Signatures and Chops—Contract Practice Moves Towards E-Signatures
Paul Hastings LLP
Paul Hastings LLP logo
Japan August 29 2022
Context

As far as one can remember, Japanese agreements have always used seal impressions to give additional weight to signatures and add hurdles to forgery. At least that was how the practice of seal is believed to have begun because it was a trouble to forge someone’s seal. This argument is still valid for seals that are registered with the government, the jitsuin (registered seal). However, for seals that don’t come with governmental registration, it is speculative whether the purported seal in fact is a property of the signing party.

Japan’s Civil Procedure Code provides that a private document is deemed to be validly created if there is a party’s signature or his/her seal impression. Article 228, Para 4. Note that this is or not and, unlike the Japanese business practice which requires both. Under the case law, this presumption also extends to cover the signor’s intent to affix the signature/seal (usually both). This is a rebuttable presumption but is a handy provision to eliminate the first line of debate as to whether a document is in fact validly created and was based on the signor’s true intention.

Japan has used the seal for so long (well over 100 years) that walking away from it had seemed nearly impossible. Then COVID-19 and remote work took over. Many corporate employees had to come into empty offices just to attach seal impressions to create a valid contract in that environment. It was becoming more and more obvious that something had to be done.

In spite of the common belief prevalent among expatriates, e-signatures create binding contracts under Japanese law today, as explained below.

Underlying law

Long before COVID-19, Japan had enacted the Act on Electronic Signatures and Certification Business (the “E-signature Act”) in 2010. For various practical reasons (e.g., each party had to contract with an e-signature vendor for certification), e-signatures never quite caught on until COVID-19. That being said, the legal infrastructure had existed in the following form (and the e-signature vendors recently adjusted their practices to use vendor-provided e-signatures):

An electronic signature (“e-signature”) to have comparable evidentiary value to a wet signature must satisfy: (a) the created information shows that the person attaching the e-signature documented it; (b) the created information can be confirmed that no modifications have been made since created; and (c) certain electro-magnetic records embodying the created information must bear the e-signature of an acting party, then the document is deemed to be validly created (i.e., a rebuttable presumption parallel to the paper-based Civ. Proc. Code, Article 228, Para. 4 discussed above). The e-signature must be affixed only by the rightful principal in an environment that properly manages the encryption and the property containing it (the “impenetrability requirement[1]”). Article 2, Para. 1 and Article 3 of the E-Signature Act.

Legal requirements and limits

By this time, the e-signature service provider has almost universally adjusted its business model and has agreed to e-sign a document as principal for the true party’s benefit. Mechanically speaking under this scheme, e-signatures are affixed by the e-signature service provider. How this qualifies for the requirement (a) of an e-signature above (the e-signor must be the creator of the document) needs some explanation.

The government ministries clarified this gap by stating in the Q&A of May 12, 2020 that, for purposes of Article 2, Para 1 of the E-signature Act, so long as the impenetrability requirement is satisfied, the true party in interest is deemed to be the one signing the document “through (with the assistance of)” the service provider. Such impenetrability is further bolstered by the true parties’ remittal of e-mails and time stamp information to the e-signature service provider.

In light of the presumption granted under Article 3 of the E-Signature Act[2], there is a requirement (c), i.e., to secure an “environment that properly manages the encryption and the property containing it.” Put differently, it is necessary that another person cannot casually create an e-signature to be provided and processed. This for example can be supported by two-element authentication (one via email registered, and the other via a separate device communicating a separate access code), but it is just one example. There is no legal requirement for the verification of the identity of the e-signor being the user of e-service in the Q&A of September 3, 2020, although the value of such confirmation is acknowledged depending on the actual circumstances.

Rebuttable presumption means that the presumption of a valid contract may be overcome by other extrinsic evidence. To effectively refute a rebuttal attempt, it is important to store in good order, e.g., e-mail exchange with the other party, and know-your-counterparty due diligence documents, among others.

Conclusion

The long business tradition of wet ink signature and chop is beginning to fade in Japan although it is possible to continue using them. There are statutory requirements to ensure e-signature’s validity, however they are usually satisfied if you use a reputable e-signature service. Even in trans-national agreements, the validity of a Japanese signature is a matter of Japanese law. So the parties can begin enjoying the new freedom of e-signatures for all Japanese law purposes. For practicing lawyers that deal with Japan: note that it is no longer required that contractual parties provide wet signatures with seals.

To view all formatting for this article (eg, tables, footnotes), please access the original here.
Paul Hastings LLP - Toshiyuki Arai
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Filed under
Japan Company & Commercial IT & Data Protection Litigation Paul Hastings LLP
Topics
Due diligence Electronic signature Coronavirus
Popular articles from this firm
With Japan's Ratification, the Singapore Mediation Convention Gains International Momentum*
Japan*
Japanese Supreme Court Rules on Regulations Against Unverified Claims in Advertising - The Validity of Regulatory Design Affirmed (Legal Landscape, Constitutionality and Review Standard)*
New Amendment To Japan’s Data Privacy Law (APPI)*
A Japanese Supreme Court Decision on Enforcement of American Judgment with Punitive Damages*
If you would like to learn how Lexology can drive your content marketing strategy forward, please email enquiries@lexology.com.

Professional development 
Private Company Acquisitions - An Essential Guide - Learn Live

MBL Seminars | 1.25 CPD hours
Online
4 March 2025
ChatGPT & Generative AI - An Advanced Guide to The Legal & Regulatory Aspects - Learn Live

MBL Seminars | 1.25 CPD hours
Online
31 March 2025
Technological M&A - A Competitive Tool in the Era of Disruptive Innovations - Learn Live

MBL Seminars | 2 CPD hours
Online
24 April 2025
View all
Related practical resourcesPRO
Checklist
Checklist: Privacy and data security due diligence in M&A (USA)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Processor due diligence (data protection and cybersecurity) (EU)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Steps to mitigate risks associated with AI use in business (USA)
Recently updated
View all
Related research hubs
Coronavirus
Due diligence
Japan
Litigation
Company & Commercial
×
My Lexology
Access my saved content
 Full article, 36 minutes ago, Arias
Digitalization in Honduras: regulation on electronic signatures
Resources
Daily newsfeed
Panoramic
Research hubs
Learn
In-Depth
Lexy: AI search
Scanner
Lexology Index
Find an expert
Reports
Research methodology
Submissions
Instruct Counsel
Client Choice 2025
More
About us
Legal Influencers
Firms
Blog
Events
Popular
Code of ethics
Lexology Academic
Legal
Terms of use
Cookies
Disclaimer
Privacy policy
Contact
Contact
RSS feeds
Submissions
 
Search
Search Lexology
Follow on X
Follow on LinkedIn
© Copyright 2006 - 2025 Law Business Research

Law Business Research
