https://www.dwt.com/blogs/employment-labor-and-benefits/2021/06/e-signing-arbitration-agreements#page=1
Search
Search Lexology
Lexology
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
E-Signing Arbitration Agreements in a Remote World
Blog Employment Advisor
Davis Wright Tremaine LLP
Davis Wright Tremaine LLP logo
USA June 17 2021
A recent California Court of Appeal decision (Bannister v. Marinidence OPCO, LLC) provides employers with important guidance about using electronic signatures to confirm acceptance of arbitration agreements with employees. This guidance is particularly critical as employers increasingly onboard new employees remotely and rely on digital signatures for an array of forms and agreements.

In Bannister, Maureen Bannister filed a wrongful termination case against her former employer, Marinidence. The employer moved to compel arbitration, attaching Ms. Bannister's (electronically) signed arbitration agreement to the petition to prove the existence and validity of the agreement. Ms. Bannister, in turn, challenged the validity of the arbitration agreement, presenting evidence that she had not signed or reviewed the document herself, and testifying that the employer's human resources team had instead signed the agreement electronically for her during their onboarding process.

Although Marinidence presented evidence to the contrary, the Superior Court determined that the employer had not proved, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the signature was valid. The court thus determined that the arbitration agreement was not enforceable. The appellate court affirmed.

California Civil Code section 1633.9(a) governs the authentication of electronic signatures and provides that "an electronic signature may be attributed to a person if 'it was the act of the person.'" The "act of the person" may be shown in any manner, "including a showing of the efficacy of any security procedure applied to determine the person to which the electronic record or electronic signature was attributable."

For example, many courts have held that an electronic signature is valid, and therefore an arbitration agreement signed electronically enforceable, when the employer presents evidence that the electronic signature required a unique login and password—known only to the employee bound by and who signed the agreement. In Bannister, although Marinidence presented evidence that knowledge of Ms. Bannister's social security number, employee identification information, and pin code were required to sign the agreement, Ms. Bannister persuaded the court that the employer also had that information and thus could have signed the document for her.

The Bannister decision emphasizes the importance for employers of focusing on how arbitration agreements and other documents are reviewed and signed by employees during the onboarding process and is consistent with other appellate decisions that have also considered whether an employee's electronic signature on an arbitration agreement is sufficient to compel enforcement.1 This guidance is especially important as the frequency of employees working remotely in a post-COVID world increases.

Employer Takeaway

The important takeaway from the California appellate decision is that electronic signatures (versus "wet" or written signatures) are more easily subject to challenge on a motion to compel arbitration. Although the onboarding process can be expedited through the use of technological advances, such as electronic signatures, it is important to ensure that employees are provided with the opportunity to review the documents without interference, and that they sign the documents themselves.

To create an enforceable agreement when using e-signatures, the employee's signature should also be verifiable, such that only the employee for whom the document applies could have signed the agreement. Alternatively, relying on a separate, stand-alone agreement acknowledging the employee's consent to the use of e-signatures during the onboarding process is helpful for minimizing the issues inherent to electronic transactions in the workplace.

Finally, perhaps the better (and more conservative) approach is to simply collect "wet" signatures from employees on their onboarding documents, when possible. To review additional helpful tips regarding employment arbitration agreements, please see these articles from our DWT firm archives:

Mandatory Arbitration Agreements Must Exclude Unfair Labor Practice Charges Under the National Labor Relations Act
Assessing the Pros and Cons of Class Action Waivers in Employment Arbitration Agreements
When Should Employers Use Arbitration Agreements?
Davis Wright Tremaine LLP - Crystal Miller-O'Brien and Beatrice Nuñez-Bellamy
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Filed under
USA California Arbitration & ADR Employment & Labor Litigation Davis Wright Tremaine LLP
Topics
Electronic signature
Popular articles from this firm
Armed Services Board of Contract Appeals Restrictively Interprets Standard Government Release Language*
H-1B Cap Lottery Season Commences on March 7, 2025*
Food Venture Financing News - Weekly Issue No. 224*
What Could a "Strategic Bitcoin Reserve" Mean in Practice?*
New Administration Outlook: Trump's Executive Order on Independent Agencies—and Asserting the Unitary Executive (Part 1)*
If you would like to learn how Lexology can drive your content marketing strategy forward, please email enquiries@lexology.com.

More from Employment Advisor
H-1B Cap Lottery Season Commences on March 7, 2025
New Administration Outlook: Guidance for Employers Amid the Attack on LGBTQ Workers
Critical Compliance Note for Employers in States With Paid Family or Medical Leave
New York City Requires Employers To Post Lactation Accommodation Policy
California Employers: Time-Sensitive Compliance Note for Hiring During Southern California Wildfires
Related practical resourcesPRO
How-to guide
How-to guide: How to comply with legal developments relating to Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (USA)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Managing employees’ return to office working (UK)
Recently updated
How-to guide
How-to guide: How to avoid age discrimination in the workplace (UK)
Recently updated
View all
Related research hubs
USA
Employment & Labor
Litigation
×
My Lexology
Access my saved content
 Full article, 41 minutes ago, Arias
Digitalization in Honduras: regulation on electronic signatures
Resources
Daily newsfeed
Panoramic
Research hubs
Learn
In-Depth
Lexy: AI search
Scanner
Lexology Index
Find an expert
Reports
Research methodology
Submissions
Instruct Counsel
Client Choice 2025
More
About us
Legal Influencers
Firms
Blog
Events
Popular
Code of ethics
Lexology Academic
Legal
Terms of use
Cookies
Disclaimer
Privacy policy
Contact
Contact
RSS feeds
Submissions
 
Search
Search Lexology
Follow on X
Follow on LinkedIn
© Copyright 2006 - 2025 Law Business Research

Law Business Research
