https://loupedin.blog/2025/02/will-labour-law-go-digital-after-all/#page=1
Search
Search Lexology
Lexology
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Will labour law go digital after all?
Blog LoupedIn
Gowling WLG
Gowling WLG logo
Germany February 14 2025
Click here to listen to the audio

In addition to the modernization of the Verification Act, the German “traffic light government” has passed a few more simplifications, at least in terms of digitality – although you have to look closely regarding reference letters:

Reference letters

Employment references can now be issued in electronic form if the employee agrees. But be careful: the electronic form requires a qualified electronic signature: a simple e-mail is not enough!

Parental leave

From May 2025, parental leave and part-time parental leave claims can be made in text form (e.g. by email). And: The employer may also provide feedback in text form. Correspondence regarding parental leave can therefore be handled by email in the future.

Caregiver leave

The same applies to carers as to parents: carers’ leave can now also be requested in text form.

Retirement age limit

Employment contracts often contain clauses regarding the automatic ending of the contract without termination when the statutory retirement age is reached: such provisions can now also be concluded in text form. If such a provision has been “forgotten” in the employment contract, the employer can also agree upon this with the employee by email now.

Working Hours Act

The Working Hours Act and the regulations based on it previously had to be displayed physically in a suitable place in the company. The law now reflects the realities prevailing in many places anyway: the “usual information and communication technology” on site is sufficient – i.e. information on the intranet / via an app or similar.

Gowling WLG - Annette Knoth
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Filed under
Germany Employment & Labor Gowling WLG
Popular articles from this firm
International arbitration - review of 2024*
Q&A: setting up and operating a joint venture in Germany*
Does a sub-licence continue after its head licence terminates? A comparison of the German and UK positions*
Q&A: setting up and operating a joint venture in Germany*
Reproduction of Opel logo on imitation toy cars does not infringe trade mark rights*
If you would like to learn how Lexology can drive your content marketing strategy forward, please email enquiries@lexology.com.

More from LoupedIn
Spectre of multi-million-dollar counterfeiting hangs over Super Bowl Sunday
UK litigation funding: Mastercard settlement approved by court despite funder challenge
UK Litigation funding: Court deliberation of ‘multiple approach’ back on the timetable
UPC has jurisdiction over actions for damages following a decision issued by national courts
UPC Court of Appeal denies liability of Belkin’s managing directors as intermediaries for patent infringement - Partial suspensive effect of the appeal granted
Related practical resourcesPRO
How-to guide
How-to guide: How to comply with legal developments relating to Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (USA)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Managing employees’ return to office working (UK)
Recently updated
How-to guide
How-to guide: How to avoid age discrimination in the workplace (UK)
Recently updated
View all
Related research hubs
Germany
Employment & Labor
×
My Lexology
Access my saved content
 Full article, 44 minutes ago, Arias
Digitalization in Honduras: regulation on electronic signatures
Resources
Daily newsfeed
Panoramic
Research hubs
Learn
In-Depth
Lexy: AI search
Scanner
Lexology Index
Find an expert
Reports
Research methodology
Submissions
Instruct Counsel
Client Choice 2025
More
About us
Legal Influencers
Firms
Blog
Events
Popular
Code of ethics
Lexology Academic
Legal
Terms of use
Cookies
Disclaimer
Privacy policy
Contact
Contact
RSS feeds
Submissions
 
Search
Search Lexology
Follow on X
Follow on LinkedIn
© Copyright 2006 - 2025 Law Business Research

Law Business Research
