https://www.schoenherr.eu/content/everyday-use-of-electronic-documents-in-poland
Search
Search Lexology
Lexology
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Everyday use of electronic documents in Poland
Schoenherr
Schoenherr logo
Poland February 12 2025
In Poland, the most common form of documentation is written, but the rapid development of technology is increasing the popularity of electronic signatures. The Polish Civil Code recognises three forms of juridical acts: written, electronic and document. The electronic form can be considered equivalent to the written form if the electronic declaration is accompanied by a qualified electronic signature (QES).

The use of QES simplifies document circulation and makes conducting everyday business more convenient. QES recognised in Poland is a digital signature with a qualified certificate issued by a trust service provider in an EU Member State in compliance with the eIDAS regulation.

Many popular electronic signature solutions, such as DocuSign, AdobeSign or eSignly, generally lack a qualified certificate and cannot be used to sign documents in written form. The same applies to the trusted signature ("Podpis Zaufany"), which is frequently used in Poland for transactions with public authorities. While it confirms identity and allows document signing, it does not qualify as a QES. Documents signed with these tools are considered to be signed in a document form. If neither written form nor another specific form is reserved by law or agreed upon by the parties, the document signed in this manner will be valid and binding.

Each EU Member State maintains public lists of trust service providers. In Poland, this list is managed by the National Bank of Poland through a system known as the National Certification Centre. These lists are compiled by the European Commission and are accessible on the eIDAS Dashboard. It is easy to verify whether a signature is a QES that can be used for signing documents in written form, thereby ensuring the legal security of the documents.

Schoenherr - Agnieszka Stawiarska and Klaudia Szatan
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Filed under
Poland IT & Data Protection Schoenherr
Popular articles from this firm
Green Guarantees in Poland*
Liability for damages: the missing piece of the AI Act puzzle*
Dark patterns are everywhere - and the authorities know about it*
Are gift cards money in Poland?*
To the point: Financial regulation | 10/2024*
If you would like to learn how Lexology can drive your content marketing strategy forward, please email enquiries@lexology.com.

Related practical resourcesPRO
Checklist
Checklist: Lawful processing of personal data under the GDPR (UK)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Making an international transfer of personal data under the GDPR (EU)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Lawful processing of personal data under the GDPR (EU)
Recently updated
View all
Related research hubs
Poland
IT & Data Protection
×
My Lexology
Access my saved content
 Full article, 44 minutes ago, Arias
Digitalization in Honduras: regulation on electronic signatures
Resources
Daily newsfeed
Panoramic
Research hubs
Learn
In-Depth
Lexy: AI search
Scanner
Lexology Index
Find an expert
Reports
Research methodology
Submissions
Instruct Counsel
Client Choice 2025
More
About us
Legal Influencers
Firms
Blog
Events
Popular
Code of ethics
Lexology Academic
Legal
Terms of use
Cookies
Disclaimer
Privacy policy
Contact
Contact
RSS feeds
Submissions
 
Search
Search Lexology
Follow on X
Follow on LinkedIn
© Copyright 2006 - 2025 Law Business Research

Law Business Research
