https://www.dlapiper.com/en-us/insights/publications/2021/07/with-illinoiss-adoption-of-ueta-united-states-near-full-adoption
Search
Search Lexology
Lexology
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
With Illinois's adoption of UETA, United States near full adoption
DLA Piper
DLA Piper logo
USA July 2 2021
With Illinois adopting the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act (UETA), the US has reached near-complete state-by-state adoption of this law. Specifically, on June 25, 2021, Governor JB Pritzker approved SB2176, which enacts the UETA in Illinois, making it the 49th state to do so. The bill repealed Illinois’s prior electronic signature law, the Electronic Commerce Security Act (ECSA). The bill also made corresponding changes to various Illinois laws to conform cross references to the new UETA rather than the prior ECSA. The bill took effect immediately on June 25, 2021. This comes on the heels of Washington adopting its version of UETA in 2020 (previously covered here).

To date, New York is the only state that has not adopted a version of the UETA. New York has the New York Electronic Signatures and Records Act (NYESRA), which provides that “an electronic signature may be used by a person in lieu of a signature affixed by hand. The use of an electronic signature shall have the same validity and effect as the use of a signature affixed by hand.” Further, while not an adoption of UETA, New York courts have held that the New York legislature sought to make NYESRA fully consistent with the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act.

Finally, while all states but New York have adopted UETA, not all states have adopted the “uniform” version of UETA. Most notable is California, which contains a greatly expanded list of exemptions, meaning that the use of electronic records and signatures will not apply to such transactions absent other California laws expressly allowing their use. Therefore, careful consideration is encouraged when proceeding electronically in California.

DLA Piper - Margo H. K. Tank, David Whitaker, Andrew Grant and Elizabeth S.M. (Liz) Caires
﻿
 Save & file  View original  Forward  Print 
 Share
 
 Follow
 Like  Instruct
Filed under
USA Illinois IT & Data Protection DLA Piper
Popular articles from this firm
White House Executive Orders impacting tax and trade - developments of the week of February 10, 2025*
Blockchain and Digital Assets News and Trends - February 2025*
Food and Beverage News and Trends - February 24, 2025*
Industrials Regulatory News and Trends - February 24, 2025*
President Trump’s DEI Executive Orders: Recent developments for employers to know*
If you would like to learn how Lexology can drive your content marketing strategy forward, please email enquiries@lexology.com.

Related practical resourcesPRO
Checklist
Checklist: Lawful processing of personal data under the GDPR (UK)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Making an international transfer of personal data under the UK GDPR (UK)
Recently updated
Checklist
Checklist: Lawful processing of personal data under the GDPR (EU)
Recently updated
View all
Related research hubs
USA
IT & Data Protection
×
My Lexology
Access my saved content
 Full article, 48 minutes ago, Arias
Digitalization in Honduras: regulation on electronic signatures
Resources
Daily newsfeed
Panoramic
Research hubs
Learn
In-Depth
Lexy: AI search
Scanner
Lexology Index
Find an expert
Reports
Research methodology
Submissions
Instruct Counsel
Client Choice 2025
More
About us
Legal Influencers
Firms
Blog
Events
Popular
Code of ethics
Lexology Academic
Legal
Terms of use
Cookies
Disclaimer
Privacy policy
Contact
Contact
RSS feeds
Submissions
 
Search
Search Lexology
Follow on X
Follow on LinkedIn
© Copyright 2006 - 2025 Law Business Research

Law Business Research
